now the international court of justice
says that it'll deliver its ruling on
Friday on the provisional measures
requested by South Africa in its
genocide case against Israel in December
its government brought the case against
Israel accusing it of genocidal acts and
its assaults on Gaza it requested
emergency measures including for Israel
to suspend its military operations in
Gaza now the icj's ruling on Friday does
not address the fundamental issue of
whether Israel is committing genocide
that's expected to Take Years instead
it'll consider South Africa's request
for nine provisional measures now if
granted that could include an order for
Israel to stop its military campaign and
ensure Palestinians have access to
humanitarian assistance the court could
also declin to order the interim
measures Israel's prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has already hinted
that he would not feel Bound By any such
order that's despite orders from the icj
being legally binding and not able to be
appealed however the court has little
power to enforce its
verdicts earlier we spoke to Michael
Becker a former associate lawyer at the
icj the international criminal court of
justice International court of justice I
should say icj will deliver a ruling on
Friday on South Africa's requests for
action on Israel's violations in Gaza in
its applications you'll recall South
Africa accuses Israel of carrying out
genocide in Gaza and it asks the court
to indicate provisional measures to act
against further severe irreparable harm
to the rights of Palestinian people to
prevent and punish genocide let's speak
to Michael Becker about this he's an
assistant professor at Trinity College
Dublin School of Law and was formerly
working at the international court of
justice Michael good to have you with us
so just for our International audience
to recap what's happened here about two
weeks ago the icj heard South Africa's
arguments uh at at the hag then it heard
Israel's defense and now it's deciding
on the provisional measures what exactly
are these provisional measures and which
where do you think the court will go on
Friday when it decides
this it's really important to understand
that what the court is going to be
deciding on Friday is not whether Israel
is in breach of any of its obligations
under the genocide convention those are
as you've said South Africa's main
claims in the in the case this is about
provisional measures that's a kind of
emergency relief or interim relief uh
that South Africa is seeking while the
case is pending and so South Africa has
asked for a number of things but the two
maybe most prominent requests are first
for an order that would direct Israel to
suspend all military operations in Gaza
and secondly for an order that would
direct Israel to not impede and indeed
facilitate the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance into Gaza and so
how the Court addresses those two
requests if it decides to indicate
provisional measures at all is what to
really look out for on Friday okay so
two requests is the court likely to
Grant one request and deny another one
because I understand this has happened
in the past like in the case of uh uh
the um in the Bosnia case a few years
ago right so first we we'll see if the
court says that South Africa met the
basic test for provisional measures to
be to be ordered in the first Place many
icj experts and I would agree with with
this view think that South Africa did do
enough to show that its claims under the
genocide convention are at least
plausible and very importantly that the
Palestinian population of Gaza faces a
real and imminent risk of irreparable
harm and nothing that's happened in the
last two weeks I think has changed that
assessment so the court can the court
isn't limited to what South Africa has
asked for the South the court doesn't
have to say yes or no to South Africa's
specific requests if it decides to issue
provisional measures it can formulate
whatever set of measures it thinks is
most appropriate okay and so while I
think the court will want to say
something about uh Israel's military
operations I'm not convinced that they
will be willing to go quite as far as
South Africa has asked them to go
ordering a complete suspension military
activities okay so you don't think it
it's likely to order the suspension of
military activities even though we know
that the icg of course is part of the UN
system and we've heard time in time from
the UN Secretary General in the last few
weeks he's called for a ceasefire in
Gaza you think that that is not likely
to influence uh the
decision well I think it's more likely
that the court will say something that's
quite similar to what we saw in the UN
security resolution back on the 22nd of
December so that would be uh instructing
Israel to ensure that any military
operations taking place are in
accordance with international law and
abide by Israel's other obligations
under international law right uh I think
the court also will address the request
relating to humanitarian assistance and
direct Israel to ensure that it's not
doing anything that impedes the
effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance in accordance with
international law all right Michael
speaking here hypothetically of course
if the
court grants and rules in favor of these
provisional measures that South Africa
has requested and perhaps other measures
like you've said what happens after that
I mean is there an enforcement mechanism
here so the court can't enforce its own
decisions that rests with other actors
within the International System uh in
this scenario it's difficult to imagine
Security Council playing a role so
really what this will do is Place
additional political pressure on Israel
to work towards uh a ceasefire we know
that that's already taken place anyway
but this will be an additional pressure
point on Israel and also it will place
additional pressure I think on some of
Israel's strongest allies to do what
they can behind the scenes to try to
push this towards some kind of
resolution and address the humanitarian
situation on the ground okay one last
question Michael before we let you go in
we really appreciate your your expertise
on this um they are deciding on the
provisional measures on Friday the court
as you mentioned early on is not ruling
on the genocide allegations the genocide
case against uh Israel at this time how
long will it take to make that ruling
and what do you think will be the likely
outcome having heard South Africa's
arguments and Israel's
defense well icj cases take a long time
we wouldn't expect to see a decision on
the merits of this case for years this
is something that will take multiple
years to be sorted out and I think it's
premature in some ways to offer any
prediction here because yes we heard
each side's preliminary set of arguments
but both sides will have the opportunity
to put forward much more uh developed
legal arguments and importantly support
those arguments with evidence going
forward but that said the standard to
demonstrate genocidal intent under
international law is very high that
shouldn't take away from the fact that
other unlawful acts might be taking
place but to demonstrate genocidal
intent is still going to be a very high
threshold for South Africa to meet on
the merits Michael Becker thank you very
much for your expertise and and just
breaking that down for us Michael Becka
joining us there from uh Dublin thank
you for your time